+++
authors = ["Carter Fife"]
categories = ["Entertainment"]
date = "2018-02-02T09:00:38-08:00"
draft = true
image = ""
tags = []
title = "Album Review: JPEGMAFIA’s Veteran"
type = "post"
url = "/2018/02/02/album-review-veteran/"

+++
As 2018 began, many people, myself included, were more than ready to usher in another year of music releases. With the promise of new music from artists like Drake, A$AP Rocky, and Lil Yachty to arrive by the end of January, music fans alike rejoiced at the notion of brand new tracks from hip-hop’s more commercial artists. Even Migos’s release of _Culture 2_, the follow-up to last year’s iconic _Culture_, was guarantee enough that January was going to provide us with the soundtracks to 2018. However, even with all the hype surrounding some of the biggest names in music this month, one lesser known artist stands apart: JPEGMAFIA.

In _Veteran_ (an album that would have flown under the radar for most if it wasn’t for the abnormal amount of press surrounding it), JPEGMAFIA, the moniker used by rapper/producer powerhouse Peggy, strays away from modern hip-hop’s conventional sounds and structures to create an album that, for the most part, can only be described as disruptive. At a time when commercial hip-hop music has become borderline formulaic, maybe this is exactly what the genre needs. While listening to this album, I kept struggling to find things to compare it to, but nothing I came up with would remain a logical comparison for long. _Veteran_ is a composite of so many elements, both old and new, which come together in perfect harmony to form a well-crafted album, starting the musical year off right.

It is difficult to craft a phrase that accurately describes the themes, both conceptual and aural, present on every song on _Veteran_, but what can certainly be said is that each track finds itself in the liminal space between free-form abrasive ear candy and conventional pop-trap/hip-hop. If one were to visit the album’s bandcamp, they would see the key words Peggy described the album as, including "thrash," "lo-fi," "ambient," and my personal favorite, "right wing trap." These words do a surprisingly decent job of describing a handful of songs on the album.

_Veteran_ begins with one of the most conventional tracks on the album, “1539 N. Calvert,” which has a melodic and airy synth-laden melody as well as nicely arranged percussion on its instrumental. The track that follows, however, “Real Nega,” is a trashy and chaotic track whose experimental instrumental has more in common with industrial or thrash metal music than it does with hip-hop. Composed of an odious track of Peggy yelling and frantic and heavy drums, this track is reminiscent of an early cut from Minor Threat, or “Thieves” by Ministry, except with angry rapping. This sort of quirky instrumental is aplenty on this nineteen-track Ableton concoction, most notably in “Baby I’m Bleeding,” which, like the previous track, relies heavily on a vocal sample to compose most of the instrumental, which is then paired with aggressive rapping and percussion. Other tracks like “Thug Tears,” “Whole Foods,” and “I Cannot Wait Until Morrissey Fucking Dies” also feature unconventional percussion tracks, and while the former two tracks are filled with a writhing and gritty arrangement of snares and clicks, the latter features 808s that any Kanye stan would welcome. 

Despite the album being full of instrumentals that stray far from the norm of modern music, many of its tracks are abrasive and melodic in equal parts. “Panic Emoji,” for example,  contains elements similar to those of Toro Y Moi’s 2015 tape “Samantha,” while borrowing largely from crybaby Soundcloud rap culture. From the uneasy and wobbly melody on “DD Form 214,” the minimalist production on “Libtard Anthem,” and the alt-rock elements contained on “Macaulay Culkin,” Peggy creates an album full of pieces that one would never hear and expect to enjoy, or even expect to come together to create a cohesive body of work, but somehow, Peggy manages to pull off the impossible on _Veteran_.

One of the only places in which _Veteran_ is lacking is lyrically. There is a surprising deficit of risk-taking in the thematics of Peggy’s rapping which isn’t present in his work with instrumentals or production, and the album likely would have benefited greatly from it. While the writing isn’t inherently poor, the topics covered, the meter and flow, and Peggy’s lyrics are a bit too conventional and overused for an album released in 2018, and, when layered over his bold instrumentals, _Veteran_ becomes the musical equivalent of serving some really exotic meat with a side of plain mashed potatoes. However, there are certainly places where his lyrics are clever and even humorous. A clear instance of this lies on “Real Nega.” Here, Peggy yells, “I treat your p\*\*sy like Rafiki / I raise the cat like a kid,” delivering a quaint and intimate line ever so subtly. Another instance of this wordplay is evident on the track “My Thoughts on Neogaf Dying,” in which Peggy softly laments “I don’t care” over and over, until launching in a very soft and meditated rant saying “I don’t care about your bank / I don’t care about your fees.” Finally, on “Rock N Roll is Dead”, Peggy fatally delivers, “Bitch I'm coming in your house / Let's get freaky with the strap,” which should be everyone’s top lyric of 2018 thus far. I would write 3000 words on these lines alone if I was certain the _Quest_ would publish it. The writing on this album isn’t poor.  In fact, it’s far from it, but it’s the lack of risk-taking or new ideas being presented that makes the lyrical substance the glaring shortcoming of this album. While meditations on self-reflection, gang violence and doing hard drugs are nice, I’d like to see Peggy tackle more difficult themes on his next project, like origami, complex geopolitical quagmires, climate change, or his favorite Kanye album.

JPEGMAFIA’s _Veteran_ is surely unique. It grows on the listener with each press of the play button, as the listener tries to grapple with what it is they’re hearing. While this album may sound like the fever dream of Toro Y Moi, FKA Twigs, and Blank Banshee’s love child, I hope _Veteran_ brings Peggy to a higher level of fame and a wider circle of people to work with. With music-expert Anthony Fantano recently rewarding this album with a generous review, and other online music publications praising its creativity, it’s only a matter of time until JPEGMAFIA enters the mainstream.