+++
authors = ["Jacob Goldsmith"]
categories = []
date = "2018-02-04T15:31:29+00:00"
image = ""
tags = []
title = "Bashful Zebrafish"
type = "post"
url = "/2017/09/08/bashful-zebrafish/"

+++
At Reed, one is bombarded with opportunities to join all sorts of eclectic activities, from the choir to the school newspaper. One highlight of Reed is the lack of a graduate track (aside from the MALS program), meaning that professors often collaborate with undergraduates in their research. Sometimes, that can even mean underclassmen. Student Noah Crumrine from the class of 2020, conducted research with Professor Kara Cerveny in the Biology department over the summer after his freshman year. 

Professor Cerveny specializes in the study of Developmental Biology, which seeks to explain what makes organisms develop the way they do. She is one of several lecturers who teaches a section of Reed’s introductory Biology course. Last year, Crumrine went into her office hours just to ask her some questions about her research, and to look for any work that she might have for him over the summer. “My goal was to be involved, somehow, with the Chemistry or Biology department. So really, just to make inroads, washing dishes, or anything,” Crumrine said. That became more than he was expecting when she asked him, unprovoked, whether or not he was interested in doing research in her lab over the summer.

Professor Cerveny had two related experiments that she was interested in. Both arose in follow-up to previous experiments done at Reed that established that certain mutations on genes, which coded for retinal development in Zebrafish, affected the size, shape, polarity, and proliferation of neuronal cells in the Zebrafish retina. The big picture goal of these experiments surrounding mutated Zebrafish was to examine how the chemical environment in Zebrafish embryos affected their development.

The first experiment that Crumrine carried out examined the effect of a mutation, known as ‘bashful’, that inhibited the production of a protein called laminin in the zebrafish embryos.  The second experiment tested a mutation called ‘egghead’ that causes an increase in the quantity of retinoic acid in the embryo. In both experiments, he waited until the embryos had visible retinae and then used a process called immunohistochemistry to dye the mutant and control organisms to compare the size and shape of the cells, as well as the structure of the vasculature running through the retinae. So far, the results aren’t conclusive (in the first experiment, it became necessary to change to a different mutation, as ‘bashful’ wasn’t fully ridding the embryos of laminin). However, the question raised by the research—how neuronal development responds to environmental cues—is central to biological and medical research.

The fact that Crumrine could participate in this caliber of research as a rising sophomore is a phenomenon almost unique to Reed. He says that the research experience was different than he thought it would be: “It was a lot more forgiving than I think I was anticipating…since this is a teaching laboratory, in addition to a professional lab.” His colleagues, too, were helpful, mainly Seniors who had a lot more experience doing research than him, and helped him learn the ropes. Overall, the experience for him was overwhelmingly positive, so much so that instead of working the agreed-upon three days a week, he would regularly spend four days in the lab, bringing his hours up to thirty or so a week, even commuting over an hour each day to get to work.

“I think if you’re inclined toward research, or if you don’t even know if you’re inclined toward research, then Reed gives you kind of a unique opportunity, because in most places, you wouldn’t be working with the actual \[head of the lab\],” Crumrine said. While Crumrine plans to major in biochemistry and apply to medical school—where he is unlikely to be doing this kind of research—he still thinks that the experience he is getting will be very valuable down the line: “There is a certain base of skills that you’re going to acquire that will help you in future classes that you’ll take, but also there are skills that people are going to look for, later on, whether you’re applying to medical school and they need certain skill sets, or whether you’re applying to a job where they’re looking for people who are going to do certain procedures.”

If students are interested in doing research for any department, the Center for Life Beyond Reed has a page devoted to all of the applications. Even if students do not get in through the formal application, it does not mean that all doors are closed to participating in research. Crumrine went through a more informal path to research, meaning that he was not guaranteed a stipend for his work. However, he says, “It was Kara’s particular opinion that since I was doing research, that I should be compensated.” For Crumrine, undergraduate research at Reed was a positive experience and one that he is looking forward to doing again, once he is less busy with classes. Anyone who is interested in research should go to the Center for Life Beyond Reed or talk to their professors about participating in it as well.