+++
authors = ["Ben Read"]
categories = ["News"]
date = "2017-09-08T09:00:08-07:00"
image = ""
tags = []
title = "Courts Block Trumpian Immigration Law Again"
type = "post"
url = "/2017/09/08/courts-block-trumpian-immigration-law-again/"

+++
Last Wednesday, August 30, a federal judge issued a temporary ruling halting the implementation of Senate Bill 4 in Texas, a law that aims to punish sanctuary cities—such as San Antonio and Houston—if they do not conform to federal immigration policies and enforcement. Critics argue SB4 would enable racial profiling based on immigration status, because it also allows police to ask about the immigration status of any person during traffic stops. 

Orlando Garcia, the San Antonio judge who works for the United States District Court of the Western District of Texas, ruled on the basis of constitutionality, arguing that the law “ascribes criminal and quasi-criminal penalties based upon violations of an inscrutable standard, in a manner that invites arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement against disfavored localities.” He also recognized that SB4 would “erode public trust” and detriment interaction between communities with large populations of immigrants and local officials working to prevent crime. The ruling is only a preliminary injunction that stalls the implementation of the law, which was passed by the state legislature and signed by Governor Greg Abbott, while a lawsuit filed by Houston, San Antonio, Austin, Dallas, El Paso, and the smaller city of El Cenizo proceeds. Texas plans to appeal the ruling to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, which has a reputation for conservatism.

The ruling comes amidst the devastation and aftermath of Hurricane Harvey, as well as a sea of incoming reports of undocumented Latinx workers feeling afraid to come to shelters in Houston because they are worried about being asked for papers as they seek relief from destroyed homes. The Hispanic political organization Jolt called SB4 “one of the most extreme anti-immigrant and \[anti-Latinx\] pieces of legislation in the country.” In the wake of Joe Arpaio’s pardon by President Trump, other civil rights groups have compared SB4 to the “show me your papers” law in Arizona in 2010.

The distinction of “sanctuary city” is not a legal or legislative label, and the practice of providing sanctuary is highly variable across the country. In Portland, the city’s status as sanctuary means it will not cooperate with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) to find or deport undocumented immigrants (Oregon is also a sanctuary state and so this policy is consistent statewide). San Francisco has been a sanctuary city since 1989, and this includes expansive policies about when and how city officials communicate with federal immigration enforcement. 

Trump’s executive order in April that threatened to withhold federal funds from cities that refused to comply with immigration law (and also referred to undocumented immigrants as the prejudiced term “aliens”) was also blocked by a federal judge from California. Even before that, states including Washington, Oregon, and New York filed lawsuits against the travel ban on Muslim-majority countries and ultimately, a federal judge in Hawaii ruled that the ban was unconstitutional. The ruling in Texas, then, represents a pattern of judicial resistance to both Trump and Trumpian immigration laws. 

Resistance is happening outside the legal system as well. SB4 inspired protest in the form of a quinceañera as teenage girls demonstrated in their ceremonial dresses in Austin at the state capitol earlier this summer. The designation of a city or campus as sanctuary itself constitutes a form of resistance to the Trump administration. Indeed, Reed only became a sanctuary campus because of active resistance and protest by Reedies Against Racism (RAR). After a week of pressure from student protesters, President Kroger declared Reed a sanctuary campus last November. Because of this achievement by RAR, Reed pledges not to discriminate in admission based on immigration status and not to cooperate with ICE, as well as to compensate for the federal aid unavailable to undocumented students through institutional financial aid.

Notably, the ruling only struck down some components of SB4. Though the ruling restricts what officers can do with the information, it still allows officers to ask about immigration status before making an arrest. Additionally, Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton has already asked for a stay on the District Court’s decision, and he is “confident SB 4 will ultimately be upheld as constitutional and lawful.” While Portland and Reed are likely to remain sanctuaries for the foreseeable future under the liberal Oregon legislature and governor, the fates of sanctuary cities across Texas and in other conservative areas, as well as the undocumented immigrants they are trying to protect, are still in doubt.