+++
authors = ["Max Nobel"]
categories = []
date = "2018-02-09T13:43:32Z"
image = ""
tags = []
title = "Grammy Awards Cause Controversy"
type = "post"
url = "/2018/02/09/grammy-awards-cause-controversy/"

+++
The 60th Annual Grammy Awards’ most electrifying and essential moment was the performance that opened it. Appearing in the center of a grid of soldiers dressed in camo and ski masks, Kendrick Lamar performed the first verse of “XXX” in front of a towering video of a waving American flag. At the sound of a gunshot, the screens turned black and revealed a supertitle: “THIS IS A SATIRE BY KENDRICK LAMAR.” U2’s Bono and the Edge came out onto the stage to perform the hook before Kendrick transitioned fiercely to the bridge of “DNA.” As the instrumentation rapidly escalated, the soldiers moved to mob him while flares fell onto the stage behind them in an image recalling Kanye West’s performance of “All Day” at the 2015 Brit Awards. Kendrick then exploded into the second verse, delivering a choreographed onslaught ending with a cut to black and the sound of a gunshot. The camera then turned to reveal Dave Chappelle, serving as a chorus for the performance. “I just wanted to remind the audience that the only thing more frightening than watching a black man be honest in America is being an honest black man in America,” he remarked. 

Following Chappelle’s commentary, Kendrick returned, now joined by a dancer with long black hair dressed in long white robes. He began rapping his guest verse on Rich The Kid’s “New Freezer,” accentuated by the dancer’s pounding of a huge taiko drum while circling around it and the flares going off rhythmically behind them. Kendrick then stormed into his guest verse on Jay Rock’s “King’s Dead” (from the _Black Panther_ soundtrack he’s curating) as the dancer moved to counter his movements and the stage lights darted around them, ending once again with a cut to black and the sound of a gunshot. “Is this on cable? This is CBS?” Chapelle asked. “It looks like he’s singing and dancing, but this brother’s taking enormous chances. Rumble, young man, rumble!” 

Kendrick began his performance’s denouement surrounded by the soldiers, now clad in red hoodies and masks, as he entered the second half of his verse. After the dancers returned to their grid formation, they were shot down one after the other as a gunshot rang in every count on his final bars. With his last line, the stage erupted one more time. He had rewritten each verse to ensure that nothing would be bleeped or muted. Every single thing he wanted to express had gotten through.

When the Grammy nominations were announced on November 28, the Recording Academy showed signs of progressing from celebrating veteran performers and radio-friendly pop to works of diverse, vibrant, and relevant artistry. Most notable were the inroads made by Hip-Hop/R&B, the most consumed genre in the U.S. in 2017. _DAMN._ by Kendrick Lamar and _4:44_ by Jay-Z were highly personal, critically acclaimed, commercially successful, and culturally impactful projects confronting societal and political realities of black life in America. Both received Album of the Year nominations. Joining them was _“Awaken, My Love!”_, a neo-funkadelic revisitation from _Atlanta_ creator Donald Glover who makes music under the moniker Childish Gambino. The category was rounded out by Lorde’s powerfully felt sophomore effort _Melodrama_ and the ultimate upsetter, Bruno Mars’ polished new jack swing throwback _24K Magic_. Nominated in the smaller and genre-specific categories were a host of dynamic Hip-Hop/R&B artists, both seasoned and breaking through, ranging from SZA, Daniel Caesar, and Rhapsody to Run the Jewels, No I.D., and Tyler, The Creator.

The show itself took 180 minutes to present 9 awards (the other 34 were given out in a pre-televised ceremony). Those three sluggish hours staidly stuffed with dull sketches, a three-minute Target commercial, and outmoded ballads were sporadically respited by performances from the aforementioned Childish Gambino and SZA along with two more appearances from Dave Chappelle and an affecting #MeToo tribute from Kesha. 

While Kendrick Lamar swept the rap categories, he, like Kanye West before him, was shut out of the major categories. Jay-Z, the night’s most-nominated artist, went home empty handed. Women, save for Best New Artist winner Alessia Clara, also failed to take home any of the major awards. Lorde, the only woman nominated for Album of the Year, was the only nominee for the award who didn’t receive an invitation to perform solo, even after Jay-Z declined his, on a night that saw Shaggy and Sting appear twice. 

When asked about his ceremony’s male-domination, Recording Academy President Neil Portnow declared that “women need to step up” if they want to earn more awards. Artists like Frank Ocean and Drake declined to submit their most recent releases for Grammy consideration while some of music’s biggest stars (Taylor Swift, Justin Bieber) and this year’s winners (Ed Sheeran, The Weeknd) failed to show. This year’s nominations suggested the Grammys were at last moving in a more progressive direction, but this year’s awards only served to render their irrelevance all the more evident.