+++
authors = ["Mitzi Zitler"]
categories = ["Opinion"]
date = "2017-09-08T09:00:40-07:00"
image = ""
tags = []
title = "Op-Ed: How Free Should Campus 'Free Speech' Be?"
type = "post"
url = "/2017/09/08/how-free-should-campus-free-speech-be/"

+++
While we often reimagine the question of “Can I say it?” to “Should I say it?” there’s still the daunting matter of “_Where_ can I say it?” and “_Where_ should I say it?” While our freedom of speech is protected by the government and from the government, it is undeniable that the government has a heavy hand in many situations and areas. What legal precedents allow for the regulation of student speech and, more importantly, of student speech on a _college campus_? Posing the question, why is Reed wedged neatly in-between our speech and the American Constitution?

Let us take it as a given that the free speech clause of the First Amendment protects citizens who choose to express themselves in ways that the government might disapprove of. Of course, this statement is suspect in and of itself when we take a hard look at reality but, suppose this given is immutably true, as it ideally should be. The First Amendment leaves a lot of room for interpretation because it does not explicitly delineate what can and cannot be said between people.

So what protects a citizen who says something that a fellow citizen does not like? The answer is cruder and rougher than simply ‘_free speech_’—it is whatever protection that citizen can bring to the table by themselves. If I lived in a spindly ivory tower guarded by my personally hired police force, on property that I myself owned, I could probably scream out at the people passing below about how much I hate their haircuts—because what can they do about it? It is not an egregious form of speech, but it definitely seems mean at the least. 

But, the issue of property and liability comes in here, somewhere. It is a strange system—we are limited not just in what we say, but in where we say it. I cannot walk onto someone else’s property with my private guard and say mean things about their hair, because that boils down to trespassing and loitering.

Yes, my rights end where your nose begins, but how does that change when we displace ourselves from our own homes to the sidewalk, or a public park? Ought it change at all? Why does jurisdiction have to come into play at all? It seems almost as if there is an issue of property owners being responsible for what could potentially be said on said property—as if the accountability lies not with the speaker, but with the folks in charge. If a customer were to unload a slew of slurs inside a bodega, and the employee did nothing about it, who could you voice your complaints to? The most useful person to inform would be the employer of the hateful customer, who would hopefully try to enact some justice on them. However, that information might be hard to come by. An easier person to contact is the manager of the bodega, but this way, your complaint is rephrased: “Someone was hateful and you did nothing to stop it” as opposed to “Someone was hateful.” With the mass availability of personal information online, it has become easier and easier to go directly to the source, and hold people accountable for their speech. But there is a chain of accountability, too, that needs to be respected. If the employer was negligent and did not react appropriately to their employees hate speech, we would demand accountability from them too.

Reed is often that employer—wedged into that chain of accountability—responsible for what we say, what the faculty say, what the staff say. Reed has a duty both to provide a space free from hate speech and slurs, while at the same time offering students the stimulation and dissent to foster academic discussion. Justice Frank Murphy wrote in a unanimous decision for _Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire (_1942) that “fighting words” were outside the purview of the First Amendment, ranking speech on its perceived “social value.” This 75-year-old decision laid an amazing groundwork for the constitutionality of safe spaces. This case became instrumental in banning discriminatory language in many universities, because of the tricky legal jurisdiction that universities have.

However, most landmark student speech cases involve high school-aged students—consider _Tinker v. Des Moines School District_ (1969), _Bethel School District No. 403 v. Fraser_ (1986), and _Morse v. Frederick_ (2007). Student speech is squashed under the ideology that schools are temporary guardians of students, and have a responsibility to foster a safe yet stimulating academic environment. In the limbo of university, though, when should an administration intervene? As adults both in a physical capacity and in our legal standing, we are allowed (and encouraged) to be responsible for creating our _own_ safe yet stimulating environment. And, while we have legal precedent to prosecute hate speech and isolate safe spaces for different identity groups with different needs, we still have the right to clash, engage in discourse, and converse respectfully and assertively.

William and Mary College anthropology professor Barbara J. King writes about difference and disagreement through campus speech in a recent NPR article: “But I do celebrate the intellectual turbulence because it is a clear signal to necessary intellectual engagement.” Saying that though she personally disagrees with “physical confrontation” for any campus speakers, evidence of these turnouts must indicate that students _care_ about the context of intellectual engagement in their spaces. This _must_ be taken as a good sign in a world that seems increasingly anti-intellectual.

Hate speech does not fall under the umbrella of free speech. But everything in between is up to us—whether or not we engage, we educate, or we respectfully decline. Presumably, college speech is meant to be in a certain degree of legal limbo, because it is often not black or white, and protests are protected, and discourse is protected, and engagement is protected. Do we use that intellectual turbulence to create, maintain, or destroy?