+++
authors = ["Rollo Brandon"]
categories = ["Opinion"]
date = "2018-04-13T09:05:28-07:00"
draft = true
image = ""
tags = []
title = "Op-Ed: First They Jail You, Then They Kill You, Then They Love You"
type = "post"
url = "/2018/04/13/MLK-op-ed/"

+++
# A Romance Story between the U.S. and Martin Luther King

Let us remember a few things that are easily forgotten in the U.S.: black history cannot be understood in the timespan of a month, the violence inherent in capitalism cannot be overcome by a false sense of progress, and the Civil Rights Movement from its inception met its biggest enemy by the state. One extraordinary example of this was seen in the political activism of  Martin Luther King, Jr. It is so easy to make him the boring person everyone knows for his iconic “I Have A Dream” speech, but he, like many others during this time, was so much more than that. In order to understand history as it truly was, false narratives must first be dispelled. MLK was not in any way “moderate” nor was he passive. He was in direct opposition to the U.S. state. 

MLK as a champion of social justice began his work in the South, where segregation was the law. It is here that we find an impressive characteristic of MLK, it is only when we think of the true violence segregation wrought on the black population can we understand why standing up to the state was so important. MLK and the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC created havoc for the status quo. In the grand scheme of things, these were two more radical steps toward a more egalitarian society. The I Have A Dream speech has lost its power over time; history lost its relevance. In his fight for civil rights, the US state showed just how willing it was to help black people in their plight for equality. Take, for example, King and his associates asking the Kennedy administration to send in armed guards to accompany black children to school. The symbolic gesture would have been monumental to the civil rights movement, but of course, it wasn’t seen through. The U.S. federal government had more important things to tend to, like its international terrorist campaign. This ,however, was not a major setback, and change was still to made. The process of desegregation was incredibly violent; white on black violence and white on white violence was in some ways a proper representation of the country at large. But more impressive that the individual violence was state violence. During MLK’s lifetime, he was hospitalized, attacked, had assassination attempts, defamed, imprisoned, and anything of the like. 

Upon heading north of the United States, where there was more de jure segregation by far in large, King began to be much more vocal about the economic status of poor blacks up north as well as down south. It not only was about ending segregation, but increasing economic and political power for black people all together. This notion of a better future for black was an extremely dangerous idea, to the state whose existence was built on the subjugation of sections of the population unification was detrimental. Nonetheless, King preached, spread ideas, listened, traveled, marched, got attacked, and most importantly stood in the face of the state supporting those who are left behind. In the US, there is a particularly beautiful habit of forgetting very important aspects of King’s politics like, for example, his stance on socialism, militarism, and the totality of American culture. It is overly evident that the US has not yet heeded the call of anyone who cares for justice because the problems we face today are much too similar to the problems of Kings time. State violence on the domestic and global population was met with a lot of criticism. There are numerous editorials and news articles that questioned Kings legitimacy from the beginning, but criticizing the state was something that crossed the line. 

King’s politics, as well as any other movement that called for rights all people deserved, were met with extreme disdain not just by conservatives but the white liberal population. He was not loved by those whose existence depended on violence. In fact, in the later years of his life King was organizing for poor people. His last project was the Poor People’s March, something that we couldn’t even fathom happening today. It was during this time that he was assassinated. Again, history is forgotten looking at the state’s relationship to those who oppose it. It is commonly believed that James Earl Ray was responsible for the assassination of MLK, however, in 1999 court case _The King Family v. Jowers_ ruled that there is evidence of government conspiracy to kill MLK. The court transcripts are available online and can be found easily from the King Center. 

MLK despite American misconceptions was not loved, but was opposed as often as possible. So when King is reduced to his I Have a Dream speech, as was done in an email by the president of Reed College, he becomes a false representation of who he really was. The guise of progress in american society revolves heavily around the commodification of revolutionaries to remove any power they once had. First they jailed him, then they killed him, and now they love him.  