+++
authors = ["Faculty Members of the Administration Committee"]
categories = ["Features"]
date = "2018-02-02T09:00:49-08:00"
image = ""
tags = []
title = "Summary of Academic Misconduct Cases"
type = "post"
url = "/2018/02/02/academic-misconduct-cases/"

+++
During Fall 2016, the committee reviewed reports of five students who accessed Moodle or other unauthorized web pages during a closed book exam. Taking into consideration each student’s year in school, their response to the report, and previous violations (if any), sanctions ranged from 20 to 100 hours of community service. All sanctions included disciplinary probation for the remainder of their time at Reed and record of misconduct to be kept in the student’s disciplinary file, but not to be released to third parties unless there is a subsequent violation.

In Spring 2017, the committee reviewed reports of two students who accessed Moodle during a closed book exam. Taking into consideration each student’s year in school, their response to the report, and previous violations (if any), sanctions ranged from 40 to 100 hours of community service, and included disciplinary probation for the remainder of their time at Reed. One student acknowledged the mistake and received a sanction of 40 hours of community service. One student did not appear to reflect on the seriousness of their actions and received a sanction of 100 hours of community service. Information on these cases will not be released outside the college unless the student is found responsible for a second academic misconduct offense, in which case records should be released. 

A student both plagiarized in a paper and accessed Moodle during a closed book exam. A previous finding of minor academic misconduct showed a pattern. The committee recommended a one semester suspension, disciplinary probation for the remainder of the student’s time at Reed, 20 hours of community service, a three-page essay reflecting on the Honor Principle in relation to academic misconduct, and release of information about this case in response to legitimate requests. The student appealed the decision. On recommendation of the Appeals Board, the President removed the suspension, increased community service to 60 hours, and affirmed the other sanctions.

A student who plagiarized major portions of a lab report was required to meet with the Assistant Dean of Students for academic support, rewrite the final lab report, and attend the 2017 orientation session on academic conduct. Sanctions included disciplinary probation for the remainder of the student’s time at Reed and 20 hours of community service to be completed Fall 2017. Information about this case is not to be released unless the student is found responsible for a second offense. The student appealed the decision. On recommendation of the Appeals Board, the President changed disciplinary probation to the 2017–18 academic year and affirmed all other sanctions.

The committee received reports of two students whose wrong answers were nearly identical in ways that suggested sharing of work or inappropriate collaboration. The committee agreed it was more likely than not that one student copied another student’s exam and did not admit it, and recommended 100 hours of community service, disciplinary probation for the remainder of the student’s time at Reed, and no release of information about this case unless the student is found responsible for a second offense. In the other student’s case it was not clear if the student allowed or facilitated the copying, and the committee agreed that a letter should be placed in the student’s disciplinary file to record the concern about their behavior. The letter is not to be shared unless there is a future finding of academic misconduct, and then shared only with an adjudicating board. If there is no future finding of academic misconduct, the letter will be destroyed when the student leaves the college.

The committee reviewed reports of eight students who submitted answers that were not their own work and appeared to have come from the instructor’s manual. Taking into consideration each student’s year in school, their response to the report, and previous violations (if any), sanctions ranged from 30 to 120 hours of community service. For six of the cases, sanctions included disciplinary probation for the remainder of their time at Reed, with record of the misconduct to be kept in the student’s disciplinary file but not be released to third parties unless there is a subsequent violation. The committee recommended the department make clear in the course syllabi whether consulting solution manuals is acceptable. For one student who was earlier found responsible for a minor violation of the academic misconduct policy in their first year, the committee recommended continuation of disciplinary probation for the remainder of their time at Reed and release of information about both academic misconduct cases in response to legitimate inquiries. A student who had been found responsible for an earlier violation of the academic misconduct policy was suspended for one semester, with release of information about both cases allowed in response to legitimate inquiries. 

The committee reviewed reports of two students who copied solutions from sources rather than working through the problems. One student thought this means of studying was legitimate, but having learned this was not acceptable, expressed regret. Taking into consideration each student’s response to the report and previous violations (if any), sanctions ranged from 60 to 75 hours of community service and disciplinary probation for the remainder of their time at Reed. Information about each case is not to be released outside the college unless the student is found responsible for a second offense, in which case a record of this case should be released. Because some students think that using online sources is acceptable, and what constitutes academic misconduct varies across disciplines, the committee recommended the professor make clear in the syllabus the expectations of appropriate conduct.

In all cases the Dean of Faculty upheld the committee’s recommendations, and added that the student will not be permitted to register for classes until the Dean of Students certifies with the Registrar that the student has satisfactorily complied with the sanctions.