+++
authors = ["Max Nobel"]
categories = ["News", "Front Page"]
date = "2018-02-02T09:00:56-08:00"
draft = true
image = ""
tags = []
title = "Women in Black"
type = "post"
url = "/2018/02/02/women-in-black"

+++
Hollywood’s biggest open secret was finally exposed last October when, following initial reporting by the _New York Times_, over one hundred women came forward to accuse Academy-Award-winning producer Harvey Weinstein of sexual harassment, assault, and rape. This behavior was facilitated for over three decades with the assistance of his employees, associates, agents, lawyers, publicists, and private investigators. The only accusations Weinstein would go on to deny were those made by women of color.

As more and more accusations of sexual assault in the entertainment industry were brought forward, the “Me Too” movement emerged. The phrase “Me Too” was coined in 2006 by the activist Tarana Burke within a grassroots movement she founded to advocate “empowerment through empathy” for fellow women of color who had been victims of sexual assault, especially those belonging to underprivileged communities. Ten days after the _Times_ first broke the allegations against Weinstein, Alyssa Milano tweeted: "If all the women who have been sexually harassed or assaulted wrote 'Me too.' as a status, we might give people a sense of the magnitude of the problem." The phrase had soon been used by millions of women, spreading across a multitude of platforms and languages, and giving a name to a burgeoning movement. Milano later took to Twitter to acknowledge the phrase’s origin with Burke. Emboldened by #MeToo, multitudes of female-identified persons and their allies began to speak out against more than a hundred powerful men. The accused reached beyond the entertainment industry to high-profile figures within the realms of sports, news media, politics, music, food, and fashion. The accusations of sexual misconduct levelled against these men led to a dramatic change in public opinion and the suspension of many of their careers.

In an effort to maintain and further the progress initiated by the #MeToo movement, three hundred eminent women in the entertainment industry announced the Time’s Up initiative on January 1 in an open letter published in the _New York Times_. As reported by the _Times_, included in its measures were the establishment of “a legal defense fund, backed by $13 million in donations, to help less privileged women … protect themselves from sexual misconduct and the fallout from reporting it” and “a request that women walking the red carpet at the Golden Globes speak out and raise awareness by wearing black.”

As the first congregation and celebration of Hollywood’s establishment since Harvey Weinstein’s ousting, the Golden Globes made #MeToo and Time’s Up their ceremony’s focal points. Female activists of color (including #MeToo founder Tarana Burke) were brought along by white actresses as their “dates” on the red carpet, while television cameras kept their attention on black dresses designed by the likes of Gucci and Dior. Awards went to films and television series telling the stories of (largely white) women, while their female presenters called attention to persistent gender disparity within the industry. The speeches of the female winners, all of whom were white, were universally dedicated to #MeToo and Time’s Up. The responsibility of addressing Hollywood’s culture of sexual harassment and pushing for change fell entirely upon these women as the male winners, save for two exceptions, refrained completely from referring to the movement. Some wore Time’s Up pins as acts of solidarity, with two of them, James Franco and Aziz Ansari, being called out and facing accusations of sexual misbehavior following the ceremony as a result.

To see Hollywood’s reaction and response to #MeToo and Time’s Up encapsulated, one need look no further than Ridley Scott’s _All the Money in the World_, of which it became an inadvertent microcosm. The period thriller, based on a true story, originally starred a nearly unrecognizable Kevin Spacey under heavy prosthetics as J. Paul Getty, a showy supporting role heavily featured in the film’s initial marketing and for which Sony was preparing a sizable Oscar campaign. When Kevin Spacey became one of the first major stars in the #MeToo era to face multiple sexual misconduct and assault allegations, Sony at first decided to cancel his planned Oscar campaign along with the film’s festival screenings and remove him from the film’s marketing. As the public fallout against Spacey accelerated, Sony, Scott, and the entire cast and crew decided, with a little over a month left until the film’s release date, to cut Spacey out of the film entirely. He was replaced by Scott’s first choice for the role, Christopher Plummer, through 10 days of reshoots which added $10 million to the film’s budget. Plummer’s performance ended up being praised by critics as one of the highlights of the film and went on to be nominated for both a Golden Globe and Academy Award. When explaining his reaction to the accusations against Spacey and his decision to replace him from the film, Scott said “You can’t tolerate any kind of behavior like that. And it will affect the film. We cannot let one person’s action affect the good work of all these other people. It’s that simple.”

The saga didn’t end there, however. After the release of the _All the Money in the World,_ the _Washington Post_ reported that Mark Wahlberg, who plays J. Paul Getty’s lawyer, was paid a $1.5 million bonus for his work on the reshoots of the film. His co-star Michelle Williams, who received critical acclaim and a Golden Globe nomination for her performance in the film, is represented by the same agency as Wahlberg, WME. However, she was not aware of Wahlberg’s bonus and received $800 for the same work. Wahlberg, after facing backlash, donated his entire paycheck to Time’s Up in Williams’ name. It was later revealed by the _Hollywood Reporter_ that Wahlberg’s regular salary for the film was $5 million, while Williams’ was $625,000.

Though Hollywood is infamous for having a short memory, the shift announced by #MeToo and the Time’s Up movement will not be so quick to blow over (though the extent to which it will benefit women of color remains uncertain). While the entertainment industry’s systemic mechanisms of inequality remain in place, these movements have begun the conversations that will determine the scale and direction of the industry’s cultural change. 